doc/source/api/index.md, before:

# aas-core 3.0RC02 C# API

The API of the SDK is split into six different units:

| Namespace                                                                | Description                                        |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|
| [AasCore.Aas3_0_RC02](AasCore.Aas3_0_RC02.yml)                           | Create the model programmatically                  |
| [AasCore.Aas3_0_RC02.Visitation](AasCore.Aas3_0_RC02.Visitation.yml)     | Iterate over and transform the model               |
| [AasCore.Aas3_0_RC02.Constants](AasCore.Aas3_0_RC02.Constants.yml)       | Specify constants such as constant sets of strings |
| [AasCore.Aas3_0_RC02.Verification](AasCore.Aas3_0_RC02.Verification.yml) | Verify that the model fulfills the constraints     |
| [AasCore.Aas3_0_RC02.Jsonization](AasCore.Aas3_0_RC02.Jsonization.yml)   | De/serialize from/to JSON                          |
| [AasCore.Aas3_0_RC02.Xmlization](AasCore.Aas3_0_RC02.Xmlization.yml)     | De/serialize from/to XML                           |

Please refer to [Getting Started](../getting_started/intro.md) for a brief introduction on how to use the API.

Commit message:

Introduce enhancing (#87)
We want to allow downstream users to "enhance", *i.e.* wrap, our model
classes with custom properties and methods.

To that end, we generate as much boiler plate code as possible to make
their wrapping task easier.

In this patch, we also fix various omissions from the previous commit
(#86) in ``types.cs``. Namely:

* We did not generate the complete interfaces (the methods were
  missing), and
* The C# snippets were not adapted yet.

These omissions were only revealed once we started testing the
enhancing.

At this point, it becomes too cumbersome to maintain the
double-documentation on dotnet fiddle, so we only keep the examples in
our docs and do not update the fiddles anymore.

doc/source/api/index.md, after:

# aas-core 3.0RC02 C# API

The API of the SDK is split into six different units:

| Namespace                                                                | Description                                        |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------|
| [AasCore.Aas3_0_RC02](AasCore.Aas3_0_RC02.yml)                           | Create the model programmatically                  |
| [AasCore.Aas3_0_RC02.Visitation](AasCore.Aas3_0_RC02.Visitation.yml)     | Iterate over and transform the model               |
| [AasCore.Aas3_0_RC02.Constants](AasCore.Aas3_0_RC02.Constants.yml)       | Specify constants such as constant sets of strings |
| [AasCore.Aas3_0_RC02.Verification](AasCore.Aas3_0_RC02.Verification.yml) | Verify that the model fulfills the constraints     |
| [AasCore.Aas3_0_RC02.Jsonization](AasCore.Aas3_0_RC02.Jsonization.yml)   | De/serialize from/to JSON                          |
| [AasCore.Aas3_0_RC02.Xmlization](AasCore.Aas3_0_RC02.Xmlization.yml)     | De/serialize from/to XML                           |
| [AasCore.Aas3_0_RC02.Enhancing](AasCore.Aas3_0_RC02.Enhancing.yml)       | Wrap and enhance instances of the model            |

Please refer to [Getting Started](../getting_started/intro.md) for a brief introduction on how to use the API.
